---
title: Introduction to Computing 
subtitle: History & Present
author: Cain Susko
date: 2023
---

# The First Computers 

Computers have been around for longer than many might think. Since the times of
antiquity there have been devices which replaced the human brain with metal.

## Analog Age 

For example, the _Antikythera Mechanism_, discovered deep under the
Mediterranean Sea aboard a sunken Ancient Greek ship, is believed to have been
created to predict the movements of the solar system -- only using brass cogs
and gears.

This mechanism is an example of an __Analog Computer__, which is called such
because it replicates, or is analogous, to the real world -- thus allowing it
to predict the movements of planets by finding representing ratios between
their orbits using gears and other mechanical principles.

While these computers are very energy efficient -- only needing someone to turn
a crank to drive gears -- their fatal flaw is that they are only as accurate as
their construction. Additionally when used, their mechanisms ware, which
further reduces their accuracy.

## Dawn of Digital 

Digital computers, as you may have heard, are what most people would consider
a computer today. These computers are also made of metal -- like their analog
ancestors, however they use a completely different system to represent the
world. Where analog computers try as best they can to mimic the real -- digital
computers take the real and place it into the prefect world of math and
numbers, thus the name _digital_.

These __Digital Computers__ operate on Binary, which is a number system, same
as decimal (0-9), accept they only use two digits, 1 & 0. Using just these two
digits, or states, computers can represent any number, or type of data, using
a seemingly infinite series of 1 and 0 -- on and off.

Using this different number system, computers also use a different kind of math
-- called _Boolean Logic_ -- which can do anything normal math can do, just
using 1 and 0, True and False, On and Off.

One can explore these concepts in greater detail -- but for the scope of this
text -- the important point to understand is that digital computers take all
the errors out of doing something with analog computing. However, this is at
the cost of immense and often unintuitive logic & complexity.

# Our Modern Computers 

Unfortunately -- the computers we use today are far too complex to be
understood simply through binary and Boolean Logic. The systems and operations
that occur on the level of 1 and 0 are often not even understood by seasoned
computer scientists.

Instead, it is more effective to think about our computers through the lens of
_Information Theory_ -- which is a field of science focused on the flow of
information. This science allows us to simplify complex systems (somewhat) in
order for us to understand and visualize them in useful ways.

## The Terminal

To begin our exploration into modern computing, we shall start -- fittingly --
with the first modern way to interact with a computer. This is what is known as
the Terminal, Shell, or Command Line Interface (CLI). 

Many have seen the terminal before, however in modern times it is only
portrayed as a tool used by hackers, or other experiences computer-geeks. While
this is certainly the case, the terminal is a tool that, can -- and should --
be used by even casual computer users (most everyone these days).

The reason why the terminal is so important to understand, is because it allows
one to use their computer -- as intended -- in a programmatic way. This will
allow someone to create and save files automatically where you would like, and
also run programs created by themselves or others to do things that are
difficult to do otherwise.

One interacts with the terminal by typing _commands_. Through this simple and
somewhat standard input method, a user is able to do anything on a computer.
However, The true power of the terminal is what is called _scripting_, which is
the process of creating programs which can automate any task you could do in
the terminal, and thus, on the computer.

## The Graphical User Interface

Using a GUI, or Graphical User Interface, is what most people are familiar with
when using a computer. This method of interaction was vital for the wider
adoption of computers, as it made computers intuitive and easy to begin using
for those new to the technology. However, this ease of use comes with the
drawback that it is nearly impossible to automate tasks.

Graphical User Interfaces are certainly vital for using a computer, as there
are many things that one would not want to do in the command line as it would
either be too tedious or inconvenient -- however it is important to understand
that, in the same way, there are many things in the terminal that can be done
much more conveniently than in a GUI.

# Further Reading

With this -- admittedly brief -- overview of the history of computing as well
as computers in the modern day, I hope that you can start to look for more
learning opportunities !

Some interesting topics to look into (which will be covered in later texts)
are:

* Binary Numbers
* Boolean Logic
* Bash Scripting
* Command Line Tools
* Package Managers
